---
title: PHP and Web Dev Phobia
subtitle: Dynamic web pages are easier (and harder) than you think
date: 2024-09-03
tags: 
- webdev
- php
- ergonomics
- law-of-diminishing-returns
- psych-flavored
- productivity
- tutorial
- slowstart
---

PHP is, for better and for worse, the Python of web dev
in my eyes. It is exceptionally easy to get started, in
a way which I think younger developers may not be fully
aware of. 

So here I'd like to make them aware of it!
That's right, this is a
[Slowstart](https://til.andrew-quinn.me/posts/quickstarts-and-slowstarts/)
for people who have never touched PHP or web dev before.

Start
[the way we usually do](../the-unreasonable-effectiveness-of-vms-in-hacker-pedagogy/) on this blog, 
with the "tutorial-in-a-box"
by installing
[Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/)
and
[Virtualbox](https://www.virtualbox.org/)
so you can create a disposable virtual machine with
just a few commands.

```bash
mkdir tutorial/
cd tutorial/

vagrant init debian/bookworm64
```

This will create `tutorial/Vagrantfile`, which is a neat
little recipe for spinning up new VMs *ad nauseam*.

We only have one change we want to make to that file so
we can see what we're actually building, and that is to
uncomment this line:

```ruby
  # Create a forwarded port mapping which allows access to a specific port
  # within the machine from a port on the host machine. In the example below,
  # accessing "localhost:8080" will access port 80 on the guest machine.
  # NOTE: This will enable public access to the opened port
  config.vm.network "forwarded_port", guest: 80, host: 8080
```

Everything else we're going to do inside the box itself.
Run

```bash
vagrant up
vagrant ssh
```

If `vagrant up` complains about a port 8080 already being
used, just change it to `12345` or something. If you
ever want to start over from scratch, just run

```bash
vagrant destroy --force; vagrant up; vagrant ssh
```

in that same `tutorial/` area, and you'll get a fresh new
VM to hack on.

Now we should be inside our VM. Run the following
block of Bash commands to install PHP and a lightweight
web server:

```bash
# While SSH'ed into the Debian VM
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y lighttpd php-cgi

sudo lighty-enable-mod fastcgi
sudo lighty-enable-mod fastcgi-php

sudo systemctl restart lighttpd
```

At this point, if you go to `localhost:12345` in your
local web browser, you'll see the Lighttpd Placeholder
page. Great!

We can get a basic HTML page up and running by doing

```bash
# While SSH'ed into the Debian VM
cd /var/www/html/
sudo mv index.lighttpd.html index.php

sudo nano index.php   # or vi, etc
```

and changing the content to be

```php
<h1>Hello, world!</h1>
<?php phpinfo(); ?>
```

Reload `localhost:8080` (`12345`, etc) one more time
and you should see a screen with some HTML *and*
some dynamic content generated by PHP itself.

Believe it or not, that's all you need with PHP
to get a basic dynamic web page running.
[PHP is web shell](../php-is-web-shell/), after
all, and we should expect it to be (almost) as
user-friendly as the ordinary Bash shell is,
whatever that means to you.

The purpose of this little exercise is definitely
*not* to imply you *should* do things this way.
Rather, for a much longer time than I want to admit,
I had an irrational fear of really diving in and 
learning or doing anything with web technologies,
because over the past ~30 years we've learned an
awful lot of what not to do -- most of that coming
from the many footguns inherent in early PHP. At
the same time, I knew plenty of web devs, and never
really squared the circle as to how they could be
*so bad* at programming and still make *so much money*,
whereas teen me had trouble landing any kind of 
long-term work at all with my ... purely local 
Python scripting skills, I guess?

Nowadays I know better. Web dev has, and had, *both* 
a low barrier to entry, *and* a sky-high skill ceiling;
but the reason there are so many talented web devs today
is in part because so many of them *got started* many
years ago with a process not too much more complicated
than this. For all its faults, PHP is *extremely* fast
to just get started and making things with, and I feel
it's a useful historical lesson at least to see this
with your own two eyes. Even if you never actually use
PHP for anything in the real world.
